README.md, before:

This is a template for Lingua Franca applications targeting RIoT OS on embedded boards. It is currently configured to support ARM-based boards.

Outline of these setup instructions:

[toc]

If you have trouble, please refer to the platform-specific hints above.

## 1. Basic Prerequisites

Your system must have the following software packages (you likely have at least some of these already):

 - `git` — [a distributed version control system](https://git-scm.com/)
 - `make` — Need at least version 4.0 for RIoT (see [macOS Hints](#macos-hints))
 - `java` — [Java 17](https://openjdk.org/projects/jdk/17)
 - `nix` — [a purely functional package manager](https://nix.dev/tutorials/install-nix)

**Installation on Linux**

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install git openjdk-17-jdk openjdk-17-jre nix cmake
```

**Installation on macOS**

```bash
brew install git cmake openjdk@17 make
curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh
```

Note that `make` will be installed as `gmake` (see [macOS Hints](#macos-hints)), so all commands below should use `gmake` instead of `make`.

## 2. Micro C Target for Lingua Franca

This template uses [reactor-uc](https://github.com/lf-lang/reactor-uc), the "micro C" target for Lingua Franca. Clone that repo using one of the following:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/lf-lang/reactor-uc.git
git clone git@github.com:lf-lang/reactor-uc.git
```

To let the makefiles find this:

```bash
export REACTOR_UC_PATH=./reactor-uc
```

You may wish to put this definition (with a fully-qualified path) in your `~/.bash_profile` file or the configuration file for whatever shell you use.

## 3. Install a cross compiler for your board

The template repo includes support for using the [nix](https://nix.dev) package manager to handle the installation. Currently, it is set up to support ARM-based boards using the `arm-none-eabi-gcc` cross compiler.  You can check whether you have this already installed with:

```
which arm-none-eabi-gcc
```

To install it:

```
nix develop
```

This will create a new shell, within which the cross compiler is available.
**IMPORTANT**: Remember to re-run `nix develop` when you return to your project in a new shell.

## 4. Create a repository using this repo as the template

On GitHub, [create a repository](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/creating-and-managing-repositories/creating-a-repository-from-a-template) using [this template](https://github.com/lf-lang/lf-riot-uc-template).
Then clone this repo onto your development machine.
This will be your workspace for developing Lingua Franca programs.

To get the RIoT support, in the root directory of your new repository, do this:

```bash
git submodule update --init --recursive
```


## 5. Configure the Makefile

Your new repository has a `Makefile` in the home directory that governs the build. It is set by default to compile a very simple LF program that you can find in `src/HelloWorld.lf`.  To compile a different LF program, edit the `Makefile` to point the `LF_MAIN` to your LF program and
set the `BOARD` variable to specify your board.  By default, these are defined in the `Makefile` as follows:

```Makefile
LF_MAIN ?= HelloWorld
BOARD ?= native
```

Setting `BOARD` to `native` should result in an executable that runs in your laptop (**NOTE:** This does not currently work, so you have to specify a board).  To specify, for example, the ST `nucleo-f446re`, you would write:

```Makefile
BOARD ?= nucleo-f446re
```

Alternatively, you can override the board on the command line. For example:

```sh
make BOARD=nucleo-f446re all
```

See [boards supported by RIoT](https://www.riot-os.org/boards.html).

## 6. Build

```bash
make all
```

or with parameters to override the `Makefile configuration

```bash
make LF_MAIN=HelloWorld BOARD=nucleo-f446re all
```

## 7. Flash the program onto your board

```bash
make flash
```

or with parameters to override the `Makefile configuration

```bash
make LF_MAIN=HelloWorld BOARD=nucleo-f446re flash
```

## 8. Open a Terminal

You can open a terminal that interacts with stdin and stdout of your program as follows:

```bash
make term
```

This will display any output your program generates using, for example, `printf`.

You can also get debug output from the `reactor-uc` runtime by changing the following line in the `Makefile`:

```
CFLAGS += -DLF_LOG_LEVEL_ALL=LF_LOG_LEVEL_ERR
```

to

```
CFLAGS += -DLF_LOG_LEVEL_ALL=LF_LOG_LEVEL_DEBUG
```

## 9. VS Code extensions

To edit Lingua Franca programs, it is convenient to use the [Lingua Franca extension for Visual Studio Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=lf-lang.vscode-lingua-franca).
If you do not have [the Visual Studio Code IDE](https://code.visualstudio.com/download), you can install it using one of (for Linux and macOS, respectively):

```
sudo snap install code --classic
brew install --cask visual-studio-code
```

You may also benefit from the following extensions:

 - `ms-vscode.cmake-tools` — [Extended CMake support in Visual Studio Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cmake-tools)
 - `ms-vscode.cpptools` — [C/C++ IntelliSense, debugging, and code browsing](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cpptools)
 - `marus25.cortex-debug` — [ARM Cortex-M GDB Debugger support for VSCode](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=marus25.cortex-debug)

To install them from the command line, run:

```bash
$ code --install-extension lf-lang.vscode-lingua-franca --pre-release
$ code --install-extension ms-vscode.cmake-tools
$ code --install-extension ms-vscode.cpptools
$ code --install-extension marus25.cortex-debug
```


## macOS Hints

The tools require `make` to be at least version 4.0, and, as of this writing, standard macOS distributions have an older version.  Check:

```
$ make --version
GNU Make 3.81
...
```

You can install a more recent version:

```
brew install make
```

Note that `make` will be installed as `gmake`, so all commands above should use `gmake` instead of `make`.

## Linux Hints

To use `nix` on Linux (or WSL), make sure that your user is a member of the `nix-users` group. To check this, run:

```bash
$ groups
```

If `nix-users` is not listed, run:

```bash
$ sudo usermod -aG nix-users $USER
```

Please note that you might need to reboot your system after running `usermod` in order for the new group membership to be reflected.

Commit message:

Clarified that 'native' works only with Linux

README.md, after:

This is a template for Lingua Franca applications targeting RIoT OS on embedded boards. It is currently configured to support ARM-based boards.

Outline of these setup instructions:

[toc]

If you have trouble, please refer to the platform-specific hints above.

## 1. Basic Prerequisites

Your system must have the following software packages (you likely have at least some of these already):

 - `git` — [a distributed version control system](https://git-scm.com/)
 - `make` — Need at least version 4.0 for RIoT (see [macOS Hints](#macos-hints))
 - `java` — [Java 17](https://openjdk.org/projects/jdk/17)
 - `nix` — [a purely functional package manager](https://nix.dev/tutorials/install-nix)

**Installation on Linux**

```bash
sudo apt update
sudo apt install git openjdk-17-jdk openjdk-17-jre nix cmake
```

**Installation on macOS**

```bash
brew install git cmake openjdk@17 make
curl -L https://nixos.org/nix/install | sh
```

Note that `make` will be installed as `gmake` (see [macOS Hints](#macos-hints)), so all commands below should use `gmake` instead of `make`.

## 2. Micro C Target for Lingua Franca

This template uses [reactor-uc](https://github.com/lf-lang/reactor-uc), the "micro C" target for Lingua Franca. Clone that repo using one of the following:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/lf-lang/reactor-uc.git
git clone git@github.com:lf-lang/reactor-uc.git
```

To let the makefiles find this:

```bash
export REACTOR_UC_PATH=./reactor-uc
```

You may wish to put this definition (with a fully-qualified path) in your `~/.bash_profile` file or the configuration file for whatever shell you use.

## 3. Install a cross compiler for your board

The template repo includes support for using the [nix](https://nix.dev) package manager to handle the installation. Currently, it is set up to support ARM-based boards using the `arm-none-eabi-gcc` cross compiler.  You can check whether you have this already installed with:

```
which arm-none-eabi-gcc
```

To install it:

```
nix develop
```

This will create a new shell, within which the cross compiler is available.
**IMPORTANT**: Remember to re-run `nix develop` when you return to your project in a new shell.

## 4. Create a repository using this repo as the template

On GitHub, [create a repository](https://docs.github.com/en/repositories/creating-and-managing-repositories/creating-a-repository-from-a-template) using [this template](https://github.com/lf-lang/lf-riot-uc-template).
Then clone this repo onto your development machine.
This will be your workspace for developing Lingua Franca programs.

To get the RIoT support, in the root directory of your new repository, do this:

```bash
git submodule update --init --recursive
```


## 5. Configure the Makefile

Your new repository has a `Makefile` in the home directory that governs the build. It is set by default to compile a very simple LF program that you can find in `src/HelloWorld.lf`.  To compile a different LF program, edit the `Makefile` to point the `LF_MAIN` to your LF program and
set the `BOARD` variable to specify your board.  By default, these are defined in the `Makefile` as follows:

```Makefile
LF_MAIN ?= HelloWorld
BOARD ?= native
```

Setting `BOARD` to `native` should result in an executable that runs in your development machine, **but only if it is a Linux machine** (on other platforms, the generated code will fail to compile).  To specify, for example, the ST `nucleo-f446re`, you would write:

```Makefile
BOARD ?= nucleo-f446re
```

Alternatively, you can override the board on the command line. For example:

```sh
make BOARD=nucleo-f446re all
```

See [boards supported by RIoT](https://www.riot-os.org/boards.html).

## 6. Build

```bash
make all
```

or with parameters to override the `Makefile configuration

```bash
make LF_MAIN=HelloWorld BOARD=nucleo-f446re all
```

## 7. Flash the program onto your board

```bash
make flash
```

or with parameters to override the `Makefile configuration

```bash
make LF_MAIN=HelloWorld BOARD=nucleo-f446re flash
```

## 8. Open a Terminal

You can open a terminal that interacts with stdin and stdout of your program as follows:

```bash
make term
```

This will display any output your program generates using, for example, `printf`.

You can also get debug output from the `reactor-uc` runtime by changing the following line in the `Makefile`:

```
CFLAGS += -DLF_LOG_LEVEL_ALL=LF_LOG_LEVEL_ERR
```

to

```
CFLAGS += -DLF_LOG_LEVEL_ALL=LF_LOG_LEVEL_DEBUG
```

## 9. VS Code extensions

To edit Lingua Franca programs, it is convenient to use the [Lingua Franca extension for Visual Studio Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=lf-lang.vscode-lingua-franca).
If you do not have [the Visual Studio Code IDE](https://code.visualstudio.com/download), you can install it using one of (for Linux and macOS, respectively):

```
sudo snap install code --classic
brew install --cask visual-studio-code
```

You may also benefit from the following extensions:

 - `ms-vscode.cmake-tools` — [Extended CMake support in Visual Studio Code](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cmake-tools)
 - `ms-vscode.cpptools` — [C/C++ IntelliSense, debugging, and code browsing](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode.cpptools)
 - `marus25.cortex-debug` — [ARM Cortex-M GDB Debugger support for VSCode](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=marus25.cortex-debug)

To install them from the command line, run:

```bash
$ code --install-extension lf-lang.vscode-lingua-franca --pre-release
$ code --install-extension ms-vscode.cmake-tools
$ code --install-extension ms-vscode.cpptools
$ code --install-extension marus25.cortex-debug
```


## macOS Hints

The tools require `make` to be at least version 4.0, and, as of this writing, standard macOS distributions have an older version.  Check:

```
$ make --version
GNU Make 3.81
...
```

You can install a more recent version:

```
brew install make
```

Note that `make` will be installed as `gmake`, so all commands above should use `gmake` instead of `make`.

## Linux Hints

To use `nix` on Linux (or WSL), make sure that your user is a member of the `nix-users` group. To check this, run:

```bash
$ groups
```

If `nix-users` is not listed, run:

```bash
$ sudo usermod -aG nix-users $USER
```

Please note that you might need to reboot your system after running `usermod` in order for the new group membership to be reflected.
